Add simplified basecalling document (#1)
Jgfrausing/basecaller-p10: documents/2mer-example.md

# Conceptual understanding of basecalling

> *This aims to show an example that can aid in simplifying the complexity in DNA sequencing using ONTs nanopore devices. In general, we can view the processing done by the ONT devices as encoding from organic DNA to an electrical signal. However, the encoded output from ONTs devices is impossible for humans to interpret (decode) due to the complex signal generated by the nanopore. Interpreting the signal is referred to as basecalling and is done using artificial intelligence. The topic of this is not to make any statements regarding how to process the signal. The sole purpose is to define tangible examples that can be used to understand the sequencing process itself and underlying obstacles regarding working with the DNA material.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*The purpose of this document is to investigate the actual complexity of performing basecalling on data from an ONT MinION device through small but realistic examples.* 

From an outside perspective, the MinION can be seen as a tool for converting organic DNA/RNA material into electrical signals. Basecalling is the process of converting the electrical signals into a sequence of bases, i.e. a sequence over the letters `ACGT`.

The MinION device produces the electrical signal by pulling a piece of RNA through a scanner, called a *nanopore*, and *reading* five bases at a time. A *read* is the resistance measured while sending an electrical current through the five bases inside the nanopore. Basecalling is possible because the resistance varies based on which bases are currently being read.

Based on this description, basecalling might seem trivial, but there are certain complications, which increase the complexity of the problem. What follows is thus a number of small, tangible examples that will serve to uncover the complexities inherent in basecalling and allow for better discussions about the topic.
```

We see multiple advantages of such example:
1. Explaining the problem to inexperienced people becomes easier
2. Discussions can take a basis in more tangible examples
3. Uncovering differences between basecalling and the simplified example can provoke realizations about misunderstandings
4. (In)validate whether the `Long term dependencies NLP`-analogy holds for this domain*

> *Long term dependencies in NLP means that correlations between words are not only depended on the distance between them 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## DNA-signal creation

> *We explain the process of creating the signal while avoiding to use biological- and machine intelligence-specific terms. This is done to understand the correlation to the example, we are later introducing.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example 1: A Single Read
With an understanding of the big picture in place, we now delve into the details regarding how a *single* read from the nanopore is produced.
```

> A DNA sequence can loosely be seen as a sequence over the alphabet `ACGT`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RNA is a sequence over the alphabet `Σ = {A, C, G, T}`. 
```

Reviewer: Perhaps we should mention earlier that DNA is simply a sequence over the alphabet [AC, CA, GT, TG] ?

Example: 
> AACGTGTGACA

In the process of converting the sequence of the DNA, an integer value is created that captures the electrical resistance of 5 bases. Five such bases are referred to as a 5-mer.

Example: 
> AACGT => 354

> The sequencing device captures these values as the DNA moves through. The DNA does not move at a fixed speed, but in general, we can simplify the problem by saying, that a 5-mer is captured by somewhere between 5-10 reads. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described previously, a single read from the MinION device is the resistance measured when sending an electrical current through the *five* bases in the nanopore. In biology, a subsequence of length `k` is called a `k-mer`. A read is thus based on a `5-mer` of bases. Note that the reads are integer values.

Example: 
> AACGT => 354

This immediately brings a number of questions concerning the properties of a read to mind, which we will deal with next. 
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Does the ordering of bases matter?
For example, is the following expected if the read is assumed to have *no noise*.

`AACGT => x        # Initial order`
`TGCAA => x        #  Reversed order`
`TAGAC => x        # Completely reordered`
Where x is an arbitrary integer.
```

Reviewer: Combine to a single code block after review.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Can partial bases be read?
For example:
`aGTCAg` where the lower-case `a` and `g` each represent a half base (therefore it still reads 5 bases in total).
    a. If partial bases can be read, is there some limit to how small a fraction of a base that can be read?
    b. And will the nanopore always hold five bases in total?
    For example: `1/3 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 2/3`, where a third of the first base is present and therefore the two-thirds of the last one is as well.
```
